Therefore, dinosaurs (aside from birds)can be generally described as terrestrial archosaurian reptileswith limbs held erect beneath the body, that existed from the LateTriassic (first appearing in the Carnian faunal stage) to theLate Cretaceous (going extinct at the end of theMaastrichtian).Many prehistoricanimals are popularly conceived of as dinosaurs, such asichthyosaurs, mosasaurs, plesiosaurs, pterosaurs, andDimetrodon, but are notclassified scientifically as dinosaurs. Marine reptiles likeichthyosaurs, mosasaurs, and plesiosaurs were neither terrestrialnor archosaurs; pterosaurs were archosaurs but not terrestrial;and Dimetrodon was a Permian animal more closely related tomammals.Dinosaurs were thedominant terrestrial vertebrates of the Mesozoic, especially theJurassic and Cretaceous. Other groups of animals were restricted insize and niches; mammals, for example, rarely exceeded the size ofa cat, and were generally rodent-sized carnivores of smallprey. One notable exceptionis Repenomamusgiganticus, a triconodont weighingbetween 12 kilograms (26 lb) and 14 kilograms (31 lb) that is knownto have eaten small dinosaurs like young Psittacosaurus.
Dinosaurs were an extremely varied group ofanimals; according to a 2006 study, over 500 dinosaur genera havebeen identified with certainty so far, and the total number ofgenera preserved in the fossil record has been estimated at around1,850, nearly 75% of which remain to bediscovered. An earlier study predictedthat about 3,400 dinosaur genera existed, including many whichwould not have been preserved in the fossilrecord. As ofSeptember 17, 2008, 1,047 different species of dinosaurs have beennamed.Some were herbivorous, otherscarnivorous. Some dinosaurs were bipeds, some were quadrupeds, andothers, such as Ammosaurusand Iguanodon, could walk just as easilyon two or four legs. Many had bony armor, or cranial modificationslike horns and crests. Although known for large size, manydinosaurs were human-sized or smaller. Dinosaur remains have beenfound on every continent on Earth, includingAntarctica.No dinosaurs areknown to have lived in marine or aerial habitats, although it ispossible some feathered theropods were flyers.
Nearly all dinosaurs discovered so far sharecertain modifications to the ancestral archosaurian skeleton.Although some later groups of dinosaurs featured further modifiedversions of these traits, they are considered typical acrossDinosauria; the earliest dinosaurs had them and passed them on toall their descendants. Such common features across a taxonomicgroup are called synapomorphies.
Dinosaur synapomorphies include an elongatedcrest on the humerus, or upper arm bone, to accommodate theattachment of deltopectoral muscles; a shelf at the rear of theilium, or main hip bone; a tibia, or shin bone, featuring a broadlower edge and a flange pointing out and to the rear; and anascending projection on the astragalus, one of the ankle bones,which secures it to the tibia.A variety of otherskeletal features were shared by many dinosaurs. However, becausethey were either common to other groups of archosaurs or were notpresent in all early dinosaurs, these features are not consideredto be synapomorphies. For example, as diapsid reptiles, dinosaursancestrally had two pairs of temporal fenestrae (openings in the skull behind the eyes), and as members ofthe diapsid group Archosauria, had additional openings in the snoutand lower jaw.Additionally,several characteristics once thought to be synapomorphies are nowknown to have appeared before dinosaurs, or were absent in theearliest dinosaurs and independently evolved by different dinosaurgroups. These include an elongated scapula, or shoulder blade; asacrum composed of three or more fused vertebrae (three are foundin some other archosaurs, but only two are found inHerrerasaurus);and an acetabulum, orhip socket, with a hole at the center of its inside surface (closedin Saturnalia,for example).Another difficultyof determining distinctly dinosaurian features is that earlydinosaurs and other archosaurs from the Late Triassic are oftenpoorly known and were similar in many ways; these animals havesometimes been misidentified in the literature.
