A dog on heat is a common term that is heard frequently and often feared by dog owners. This is the time of year in a female dogs cycle that they are fertile and attract the attention of male dogs. This can be a nuisance for owners if they don't want to be stuck with a litter of puppies. However there are unfortunately other stories told about dogs and the difficulties the heat can cause. These are the stories of dogs trapped in cars unable to escape as they (in fact quite quickly) become seriously ill and often die. People are horrified by this happening and yet it still happens. It must either be cruelty or ignorance and neither is an acceptable excuse. Be aware however that remembering not to lock your dog in the car is not a sure fire way of protecting them from heat stroke. Dogs tend to overheat in hot weather and as an owner you need to be totally aware of how your dog is holding up.

Summer is typically a time of great family fun and activity. The days are long and warm, the kids are on vacation, and the sun worshipers are out in full force. But for dogs who are left outside on a warm day it's a different story. Although dogs have sweat glands on their feet, they rely almost exclusively on panting to dispel excess body heat. The hot weather raises the probability of heat stroke. Its unfortunate that the season also brings with it some very specific hazards - sunburn, heat exhaustion and heat stroke. These hazards are also a threat to your human family, but they can really endanger the lives of your furry family members. As temperatures soar, your dog will need a little attention in order to ensure his safety. Just as human athletes must take additional precautions during the "dog days of summer", we as dog owners must watch over our canine athletes. Canine heat exhaustion, however, is not limited to canine athletes, every dog is a potential victim.

The leading cause of heat exhaustion, and its advancing into heat stroke; is leaving a dog in a hot car. Even on a mild day (75-80 degrees F), the temperature inside a car can raise up to 130 degrees surprisingly quickly. Leaving a window slightly open will not prevent this heat build-up. Leaving a dog in a car on a warm day is taking a chance with a dog's life and this is not acceptable. On a warm day, the temperature in a parked car can reach very high temperatures in a matter of minutes, even with partially opened windows. Never leave your dog in a car on a warm day -- even if it's "just for a few minutes."

Heatstroke occurs when normal body mechanisms cannot keep the body's temperature in a safe range. Animals do not have efficient cooling systems (like humans who sweat) and get overheated easily. Dog's do not sweat. Their only means of reducing built-up body heat is by panting. Long coats also hold in body heat. The best thing to do in the summer for a long coated dog is to comb or brush the coat regularly. It will remove the shed hair, helping the skin to breathe and by reducing the excess hair, the coat will tend to trap less heat. The color of your dog's coat also has an impact on your dog's ability to reflect the sun's rays. Black dogs seem to absorb more of the sun's rays than dogs with lighter-colored coats. This is simply due to the amount of heat that is reflected by certain colors over others.

If your dogs body temperature gets too high, he could develop heat stroke, or hyperthermia. In addition to a high body temperature (over 105 degrees F), the signs that indicate potential heat stroke are: an inordinate amount of panting, labored breathing, bright red gums or eye membranes, pronounced fatigue, collapse, unconsciousness and seizures. If your dog displays any of these symptoms, get him out of the heat immediately and into the shade. If possible, put your dog in a tub of cool water or bathe him with a series of cool, wet towels. Do not use cold water or ice! Either will cause your dogs blood vessels to constrict and impede the body from being able to release heat. Heat stroke should be treated as an emergency; therefore, as soon as possible, seek a veterinarians care.

There are many variables in triggering a dog to experience heat exhaustion; the dog's physical condition, its age, its coat length, its breed, and its acclimatization to heat. An older, couch-potato, "snuggle the air conditioner" dog will have less tolerance to the heat than a young, romp outside all day, adolescent. Both the very young and very old dogs are among the highest risk categories. Brachycephalic (short muzzled) dogs, in general, are high risk on hot humid days. A dog with moderate heat stroke (body temperature from 104to 106) can recover within an hour if given prompt first aid and veterinary care (normal body temperature is 100-102.5). Severe heatstroke (body temperature over 106) can be deadly and immediate veterinary assistance is needed.

Sitting in a hot car is not the only way to acquire heat stroke, although sadly it is the most common as people clearly don't care or aren't aware that their dog will die if left in a car. However any dog exercising on a hot, humid day, even with plenty of water, can get heat stroke. Be careful when exercising your dog in the summer. Short-nosed breeds, like pugs, boxers, and bulldogs, are especially susceptible, as are double-coated breeds like German Shepherds and Old English Sheepdogs.
