An exercise machine is any machine used in exercise. These range from simple spring-like devices to computerized electromechanical rides to recirculating-stream swimming pools. An ergometer is an apparatus for measuring the work performed by exercising (or an exercise machine equipped with such an apparatus) as used in training or cardiac stress tests or other medical tests.

Elliptical machines, together with stationary bicycles, treadmill and rowing machines are different types of an endless-path exercise machines. Let's discuss, specifically, the elliptical machines. This article will explore the different types of elliptical machines, how it works, how it differs from treadmill, its physiological effects and how to choose the best machine suitable for your needs.



An elliptical trainer (also cross trainer or simply elliptical) is a stationary exercise machine used to simulate walking or running without causing excessive pressure to the joints, hence decreasing the risk of impact injuries. People using elliptical trainers

Generally it contains two tracks upon which the user stands; when he or she moves his or her legs, they describe an elliptical motion (hence the machine name). Some ellipticals have magnetic resistance controls that add difficulty to doing the motion. These are relatively new additions to cardiovascular fitness equipment.

Since bursting on the fitness scene a few years ago, millions of elliptical trainers have been installed in health clubs and homes. Elliptical cross-trainers are the only real breakthrough aerobic product of the past few years," says Gregory Florez, spokesman for the American Council on Exercise (ACE). "They are absolutely not a gimmick."

Elliptical equipment can be commonly found in gyms and homes, as they have always been popular among individuals who exercise regularly. It is also common to find that elliptical trainers are most enjoyed by people because they tend to be the most fun to use, and at the same time, give you one of the best results for your efforts.
Motion studies over the last decade show that the human foot moves through an elliptical pattern as we walk, run or jog. Fitness products that imitate and support this motion are the fastest growing new category of cardiovascular equipment.

With scarce time, a major factor in people's daily lives, total body exercise can be truly beneficial. A total body exercise machine meets three goals that are most desired - weight loss, time efficiency, and motivation

According to the American Sports Data, Inc., "the elliptical motion trainer, continued to grow in popularity, with 6.2 million users in 2000, up from 2.4 million when first measured in 1997."
