An equity-indexed annuity is a tax-deferred, fixed annuity, either immediate or deferred, that earns interest or provides benefits that are linked to an external equity reference or an equity index. The value of the index might be tied to a stock or other equity index. One of the most commonly used indices is Standard & Poor's 500 Composite Stock Price Index (the S&P 500), which is an equity index. The value of any index varies from day to day and is not predictable.

When you buy an equity-indexed annuity you own an insurance contract. You are not buying shares of any stock of index.

During the accumulation period you invest either a lump sum or make a series of payments and the insurance company credits you with a return that is based on changes in an equity index. After the accumulation period, the insurance company will make periodic payments to you under the terms of your contract, unless you choose to receive your contract value in a lump sum.

An equity indexed annuity guarantees a minimum interest rate if held to the end of the surrender term, (typically between 1% and 3%,) and protects against a loss of principal. It is a contract with an insurance or annuity company, and while the returns may be higher than fixed instruments such as CDs, money market accounts, and bonds, they are generally not as high as market returns. Equity indexed annuities are insured by the State Guarantee Fund, similar to the insurance provided by the FDIC. The guarantees in the contract are backed by the relative strength of the insurer.

These contracts may be suitable for a portion of the asset portfolio for those who want to avoid risk and are in retirement or nearing retirement age. An equity indexed annuity is generally purchased in order to realize greater gains than those provided by fixed instruments, while still protecting the principal.

Indexed annuities represented about 30% of all fixed annuity sales in 2006 according to the Advantage Group (see www.indexannuity.org)

Indexed annuities became quite popular during a previous bullish run in the market and insurance companies saw them as an excellent means of combining the security of a guaranteed return with the boom of the stock market. All equity indexed annuities offer a minimum interest rate and its value also does not fall below the guaranteed minimum percentage of the premium paid i.e. 90 percent at least.

Equity indexed annuities are generally affiliated to a particular stock market index such as the S&P 500 or the Dow Jones Industrial Average. However as the equity indexed annuities combine features of a typical insurance product with the traditional security, they do completely fall into each of those specific categories.

As a typical insurance product you are guaranteed minimum return and in terms of securities your investment is linked to the equity market. However, it all depends on the features that your equity index annuity provides and it may or may not be a security. The typical equity-indexed annuity is not registered with the SEC.
