In our current globalizedworld immerse in an information boom, life could not be imaginedwithout InternetConnection. Internet is one of the mostnecessary commodities of our daily life. Internet Connection can becategorized into four broad heading: high-speed Internet Connection, Broadband Internet Connection, Wired Internet Connection, and Wireless Internet Connection. Please, read carefully these line to get a good overview ofwhat's behind Internet. In that way, you are going to be able todecide the kind of service you need.

The Internet Connection is a system through whichtwo or more computers are networked, allowing communication betweenthe systems. There are various devices that take care of theInternet Connection. Internet Connectionis one of the best examples of internet working.IP or the internet protocolis one of the mail devices used forinternet connection,unified by internet working protocol, helps in running differentlow-level protocols. For the data transfer in theinternet , a Transportlayer protocol is used like TCP.

ISP stands for InternetService Provider. An ISP is a company that provides Internetconnectivity for home and business users. An ISP connection can beof more that one type, it can be the conventional modem dial-up toDSL or it can be cable modem broadband for T1 or T3 lines. Thesedays there are Wireless Internet Service Providers or WISPs thatoffer wireless LAN or broadband connections to users. ISPs are nowoffering more than just the basic Internet connection, they areoffering services like email, Web hosting and access to softwaretools.

To talk about the most common types of ISPs usedto be talking about Dial-up, Broadband, Cable and Satellite. Dialup is one of the most popular types of ISP and this is because itwas one of the first. This type of connection is good when all youuse it for is checking mail. The speed of Dial up ISP is prettyslow. Satellite is not the best ISP if what you want is high speedInternet. But it is the best bet when you are in a rural area andtechnology is not at its best. Broadband ISP these days is becomingthe most popular type. This is because not only is it faster andmore efficient, but also because it is more cost-effective. And allthat is needed for broadband is network interface card or Ethernetconnection. ADSL is a variation of Broadband for home users. Itworks on a landline connection but at a much faster speed. Theprice is competitive as compared to broadband and cheaper comparedto dial up
