When I moved to Michigan at the beginning of 2009, I began the adventure of a lifetime. My first step away from home and I was way across the other side of the country from family, alone and without a job. All I had was savings that, with pinching every penny, should last me for six months; the lion's share of it went to renting a dingy room in a dingier part of town.

Why Michigan? Why not? I had no special feeling for the place, no connections; I'd never been there before. I guess it just seemed like a good idea at the time. I'd jumped, with eyes wide open, into the deepest part of the pool of adult life I could find, now I had six months to learn how to swim. Or crawl, sopping wet, back home. I guess it was easier knowing that I did have that fallback, should I need it.

So my first task, obviously, was to get a job. The job market in Michigan is ever-changing and, at times, unpredictable. In 2005, Michigan faced a critical labor shortage in health care and the skilled trades. Employers struggled to fill the almost 90,000 job vacancies. Projections indicated that the state's workforce needs in these sectors would swell to approximately 300,000 workers by 2012. This would have been a great time to move to Michigan.

2005 was when Governor Granholm announced the MI Opportunity Partnership as a key part of the Jobs Today, Jobs Tomorrow plan in her State of the State address. The MI Opportunity Partnership was planned to retool job training programs and place unemployed workers into high-demand career fields such as health care and the skilled trades.

The goals of The MI Opportunity Partnership were to:
Place as many as 30,000 workers into jobs by the end of 2005.
Provide targeted skills training for labor sectors experiencing significant shortages.
Contact 35,000 employers to identify immediate job openings.
Work directly with employers to fill job vacancies.
Conduct pilot programs at four Regional Skills Alliances to provide accelerated job training in health care and skilled trades to meet current labor market demands.
Match an additional 40,000 workers with jobs in years 2006 and 2007.
Opportunities for insane new adults galore!

MI Opportunity Partners pledged jobs and support, and included employers from business and industry (regardless of size), health care and the skilled trades, associations, organized labor, community colleges and universities, the Michigan Works! System and Michigan's Regional Skills Alliances. MI Opportunity coordinated an accelerated strategy among its partners to provide training and new job opportunities, particularly in health care and the skilled trades.
