The present study draws on the research literature of information needs, seeking and use.
In the identification of relevant material, databases such as Library and Information Science Abstracts and
articles published in the volumes of the Annual Review of Information Science and Technology were used. 
In addition, major reviews on the studies of information needs, for example, Case (2012: 77-93),
Naumer and Fisher (2010), and Wilson (1981; 1994; 1997; 1999) were examined in detail.
This effort resulted in the identification of about one hundred articles and books relevant to the research topic. 
The preliminary reading of the above studies revealed that many of them do not offer much new about the conceptualization 
of information need because they repeat the definitions presented in earlier studies; Taylor's (1968)
classic article appeared to be particularly popular in this regard. In order to gain a new perspective on the topic, 
the focus was placed on how researchers have characterized information need as a contextual factor triggering information seeking.
As a result of the above specifications, the final research material consisted of about fifty studies.
They included research papers and refereed conference papers published in international forums.
The final sample included studies that explicitly discuss information need in various contexts.
Examples of these studies include Allen (1997), Byström and Hansen (2005), Leckie et al. (1996), Lundh (2010), McKenzie (2004),
Westbrook (2008b) and Wilson (1981). 
The research material was examined by means of evolutionary concept analysis (Rodgers 2000; Timmins 2006: 376-377).
The analysis includes six major steps:
1.	Identify the concept of interest and associated expressions.
2.	Identify and select an appropriate setting and sample for data collection.
3.	Collect data relevant to identify the attributes of the concept, and the contextual basis of the concept.
4.	Analyse data regarding the above characteristics of the concept.
5.	Identify an exemplar of the concept.
6.	Identify implications for further development of the concept.
In the present study, the concept of interest is information need (step 1). 
The data collection is described above (step 2). As to step 3, the terminology proposed by Rodgers (2000) was 
slightly modified in that the present study prefers the term constituent, not attribute while examining the
characteristics of context. As a further specification, following Lee (2011: 96), the present study assumes 
that information need is a target entity that can be attributed with a set of specific characteristics such as gap in meaning.
Moreover, using the definition provided by Lee (2011: 96), context is generally understood as a 'set of things, factors, 
elements and attributes that are related to a target entity in important ways (e.g. conceptually or pragmatically)
but are not so closely related to the target entity that they are considered to be exclusively part of the target entity itself'.
For this reason, the present study excludes investigations that characterize information need in the internal context of the actor.
Cognitive-affective behaviour is an example of such contexts. For instance, the experience of cognitive dissonance may 
affect the formation of information need (Wilson 1999: 256-257). However, the experience of cognitive dissonance and 
information need may be so intricately related that it is not possible to indicate reliably which one is a target 
entity and which one is its context.At the next phase (step 4), the constituents of the contexts of
information need were analysed. To this end, 1 research material was scrutinized to identify factors that are conceptually 
or pragmatically related to the phenomena of information need. More specifically, attention was devoted to how various 
researchers have characterized such factors. They include, for example, task at hand and dialogue. Such factors are
constitutive of contexts of information need; contexts of these kinds include, for example, task performance. 
After having identified such constituents, the analysis was continued by comparing the characterizations of the
constituents presented by various researchers. Then, exemplars depicting information need were identified with
regard to contexts of various kinds (step 5). Finally, implications for further analysis of concept of information
need were identified (step 6).
